And welcome to
It's not just code managing an open source project
I'd like to introduce the open source program director from Posit, Tracy Teal
Thank you, I'm super excited to be here today
speaking on this topic
You may wonder why this topic is in this session
And that's because I had a surprise opportunity to give this talk today because someone canceled
But this is one of my favorite topics, and I love the panel discussion yesterday
So I'm excited to get to spend a little bit more time on this topic
and so
I'm preaching to the choir in this conference
To say that open source software is the roads and bridges of technology
So when I say that, you know, what do we mean?
You open up your phone, your social media, your news, your medical records, your bank
They are all using free and public code. And this is a theme that we've been hearing throughout this meeting
Especially in the panel yesterday, and this is something that Nadia Ekbal highlighted in a report that she did
When she was a VC
She was looking for the biggest sort of unfunded opportunities in the tech space and what she encountered was open source
And so she worked on this report
to generate ideas about
Why this was happening and what the structure of open source looked like
But what we see in open source is this sort of
Inverse pyramid structure, right, where we have a lot of people who are using it, users
Who use an open source solution as is without adapting or modifying it
This is the biggest group of folks out there using open source software
There's integrators, people who integrate one or more open source components to create an application
So they may be doing a little bit modification, a little more what's going on under the hood in some of these projects
Then you have contributors, people who provide changes and improvements to the open source software
Ecosystem and then finally you have
Maintainers and these are the people who develop and control the main source code and manage the project
So we see that this is not necessarily like a very stable structure
The way that it's designed and I think that a lot of us in this room
Have experienced this, this feeling of sort of being somewhere in this pyramid
Where there is a weight on top of you in terms of the responsibilities that you have to your team and your communities
And so a lot of times too, these are volunteers, right?
So these are not necessarily even positions that are paid
The people that are supporting these structures
So, why is this a topic that is so interesting, exciting and important to me?
Well, I started in open source software development in bioinformatics
And I wrote some software that mainly I used
But, you know, my team used it too
And I started to write projects that that got more use
And I started to encounter like some of the edge cases of some of these things
But I also realized that especially in bioinformatics
One thing that was really limiting the advancement of being able to use genomic data
Was people with the ability to use data science to answer the questions that were important to them
So I was a part of founding an organization called The Carpentries
Which is a non-profit organization teaching researchers how to do data science and software development
And for me that really marked this transition actually in this pyramid
Where I thought about, oh, I'm developing open source software, I'm a part of this pyramid
But when I transitioned to running an organization
I really realized what that meant around maintaining free resources
And everything that went into it and that I had zero training in any of it
Alas, my software development skills were not particularly useful in conflict resolution
In gaining money, running effective meetings
So these are all things I say I tried to get my MBA via Google
Every time I was like, I don't know how to do that
But I bet somebody knows how to do that
So I would Google it
So that was like kind of this beginning of this journey for me
And then I was on the board of NumFocus
Super excited to be back here at this event
And I saw that the software development team
And I saw that this wasn't just like a me problem
I wasn't the only one struggling with this
All of the projects kind of under that NumFocus umbrella
Were really struggling with a lot of those same challenges
So now I am at Posit
I am the open source program director
And so I have the opportunity to work with open source developers every day
And talk about how kind of Posit fits into this ecosystem of open source
And I am the chair of the board for PyOpenSci
So as I said, this journey where I didn't know what I was doing
Is not my journey alone
There are certainly people who do know what they are doing
As they get into this
But in general, open source developers have been trying to build roads
And then we are suddenly asking them to maintain and manage the road crews for a city
So where do they get those skills?
Is this even something that people are interested in?
How do we start to think about this?
So why do we want to talk about it at a meeting like this?
And that's because shared challenges are also shared opportunities
Which opportunities?
So we are all here together
We have a lot of shared challenges
But this also means we don't need to be alone
These are shared opportunities for us to navigate these waters together
And talk about what some of the solutions are
So one thing in particular
We can provide support, training, and resources for open source maintainers together
We don't each need to be doing this on our own
So what does this look like?
So I'm going to talk about five different areas
That we can think about in maintaining open source projects
And none of this here is a should
These are all questions
These are things that you can consider
Every project is going to be different
If I'm going to say should for me, it's not should for you
So in general, what I'm posing are more questions than answers in this
But one of the challenges when you're working in an open source project
Is that you get going on the project
And that's sort of where all your energy is
And so you don't have that space to step back and think about
Why am I doing this? What's important?
So just a sense in this room
How many people have contributed to an open source project?
And how many people feel like they're in some kind of management or maintenance group?
And how many of you have had training in business or conflict resolution?
Yeah, okay, great, perfect
If you all have, well then you were going to tell me more, please
I'm always learning
So these are things that I only realized far into a project
That I needed to consider
And then, again, especially working across all these different open source projects
Realized that those were things that we wanted to be thinking about from the start
So the very first thing, this maybe seems a little bit strange
But it's identifying your project goals
Because a lot of times when you start a project
You are trying to solve a problem that you have
And maybe you write it just for yourself or for your team
And then some people pick it up and they start using it
And you're like, wow, that's cool, that's amazing
And sort of before you know it
Other people have sort of like decided what this project is about without you
And that's not bad
But you actually do get to decide what the goals of this project are
Just because you start something doesn't mean that you need to maintain it forever
Doesn't mean that you need to implement every feature
So it's worth taking the time to consider your goals
So the first thing you have to do is take a breath
Because, again, this project may have gotten away from you a little bit
So who is this for?
Who are you creating this project for?
What's the kind of person that you're thinking about this tool is for?
How reliable is this going to be?
Is this something that people are going to be using in production?
Big environments?
Or is this something that someone's using in a lab
And you can kind of print out a bunch of error messages
Or share it with some caveats?
What's the importance of reliability for this software?
What kinds of input will be important?
Not like data input, but what kind of feedback?
What do you want to hear about?
What do you need to learn as people use this?
And then finally, and this is actually really hard
But what's your vision of what will be possible if this software exists?
The world and the future will be like X if this software exists
And that seems like, oh, maybe that's a grand statement
But you're doing it for those reasons
What is your vision for this software?
So these are really hard questions
Everything I'm posing here, none of it is a jest
It is all something that you have to spend time with and it takes time
But it's something that is worth taking a day
Or go take a walk in a park and take your notebook
It's hard to answer these questions for yourself or with your team
When you're in front of your computer
All right, the next one is managing expectations
You actually get to set your own boundaries
The challenge in this is you have to create those boundaries
Those expectations, and you have to communicate them
So because it's about managing the expectations of the people
Who are using and contributing to this project
So again, we have five things to consider here
There are certainly more
Stage of the project, like where is it in its development?
How do you want people to treat each other in the space of your project?
And how do you want them to treat you?
How do you want to handle PR submissions and reviews?
Templates, this is something that I'm excited about
Ways that exist already to help you manage your expectations
And then licensing, something that came up in the panel yesterday
So stage of the project, I really love this concept in this diagram
This is from the lifecycle package that Posit is one of the developers in here for
And so there are other things that you can consider
But this is actually really important, this idea
Is this an experimental package?
Are you going to be contributing to it a lot?
Are things going to be changing really quickly?
Is it stable?
Is it something that people can use and they expect there not to be many changes?
So you can rely on it to behave in a certain way
And then, importantly, superseded and deprecated
Again, if you create something that doesn't need to last forever
One example is I wrote some software in graduate school
That worked with 454 genomic data
That package does not need to exist anymore
Because people don't even generate 454 data anymore from genomic sequencers
That's a pretty easy one
But there's other reasons why a package might not really need to be actively maintained anymore
So that's for you to think about
I think that stage between experimental and stable is unclear
Like nothing is a fine line
And you kind of might find yourself in a different mode without realizing it
But this is something to keep in mind and come back to
How people treat each other
I think this is something that's been really positive in the Python community
Over the last several years
Is the expectations of how people behave
In code repositories and at conference
And a lot of this has been around
Really, again, setting those expectations
Not just saying, hey, we should be nice
But let's write it down
What do we mean when we say that?
What are the consequences for that?
How is it that you share that something isn't going well
And being explicit about that being important?
This is a place where templates are great
GitHub actually has code of conduct templates
So when you start a GitHub repository
You can select this and add a code of conduct to your repository
I will say just putting a code of conduct in your repository is not enough
You have to think about how you might handle something that comes up
But this is a really important way of writing down
What you mean when you say how you want people to treat each other
And this is important for you
How do you want people to treat you?
PR submission and review
Contributing guidelines
You see contributing guidelines a lot in GitHub repositories
The timing of this is so awesome
Because I'm so excited about this
PR submission and review
Within Posit, we have an open source reading group
And we're reading a series of blog posts
About good pull requests
Doing good reviews of pull requests
And from this, Davis Bond put together this tidyverse
Tidy team code review principles
And so you can see there's a lot of categories here
About what does a good PR look like?
What does a good PR review look like?
So this is setting expectations for the team
We think this is already what we do
But we're trying it out
But it's also another great way to externalize
How is it?
What's a good PR to us?
What does that look like?
What are your expectations of our review?
And one thing that I really love
That Davis and Liam L worked on together
Is these patterns of collaboration
So close-knit collaboration, understudy, external contributors
So the key thing here, again, if you're thinking about managing expectations
The first thing to do is
Which mode of collaboration are we in?
Not every kind of pull request
Or every kind of thing that you're working on
Is going to necessarily have the same relationship
But if you can agree, this is where we are
Then you have a set of ideas about
What the timing is going to be
When will you get back to me on that PR?
Will you just edit and merge?
Things like that
And again, it's like
Oh, well, yeah, we kind of all knew this already
But writing it down really helps us stay true
To what we think we should be doing
And helps other people understand our process
And maybe something they can use
If they're building a new project
Okay, templates
This is my favorite
Whenever you're trying to do something new
It's like somebody's done it before
And there might be a template
So always Google whatever you're trying to do
And template
So there's a lot of great stuff in this space
There's READMEs
This README project around better documentation
We already talked about the code of conduct
READMEs straight from GitHub now
Other kinds of
They're not exactly templates
But are like
What are good package development structures?
So like the Tinyverse has
Use this package
That is like
You use this to do package development
So it helps you have good practices
In terms of what your package looks like
And then also your packages look like other people
So people sort of know what to expect
PyOpenSci has been working on these
Python open source package development guide
So if you're excited about Python packaging
And like who isn't?
I'm serious
This is amazing
This is Leah Wasser is doing this work
And Juanita is maybe here
She's going to be doing that project
For just a little while
They have put so much work into
Like really having community conversations
To say
You know, what works?
What doesn't work?
What's practical?
Really incredible work
That is really important
In these spaces about
Again, what does a Python package look like?
When you're starting
What does it look like?
What can you expect from the packages
When you take a look at them?
And licensing
I actually don't have too much to say about licensing
I thought it was an interesting conversation yesterday
Yeah, one thing that was interesting was that
Is it really open source?
That conversation
That was a part of that panel
And open source is defined by
A set of licenses
So if it has an open source license
It is open source
And when we talk about governance
We can talk about
Maybe some distinctions there
But yeah, you have to make your choices
On your open source licenses
Alright
Next one
Easy one
Who is involved in governance conversations
In an open source project right now?
Okay
I was like, no one wants it
So this is hard for sure
This is where having your project goals is important
When I said like
What kinds of input do you need?
Who is this for?
What do you want to do?
Right?
Like how much time do you have for this project?
So these are some
The BDFL model is a pretty popular one
Open governance
I think this is where we kind of got
Into this conversation of
Is it really open source?
Like open source is a license
But there's kind of this open governance idea
There's a community or a committee
Or something
Something like that
Like Python is not great
But before
It was BDFL
Who's going to make your technical decisions
Versus your organizational decisions?
And who's going to do these things?
You might decide on an amazing structure
And then be like, cool
And now who's going to do it?
And everybody looks at their feet
Then it's not really going to be a structure
That's going to work for your team
Or you need to think about
How are you going to recruit someone
Who's excited about those things?
So yeah
That's definitely a whole topic
I'd love to have a conversation
About governance in particular
So the last one then
I think is financial support
So this was again
Something that came up yesterday
And I think this is
From some of my experience
Having transitioned from a developer
To leading an organization
Was the recognition that
This is really
I mean, in our case it was a non-profit
But a non-profit or a business
Non-focus takes some of that away
By having this project structure
Where they'll do your back office for you
But you still
We come back to these
How do you make decisions?
How do you bring in money?
How do you make decisions
About how to spend money?
And this is again
Just a really challenging thing
If you've been a developer
You might not have experience
In thinking about
How you generate revenue
How you spend money
So that might be a little controversial
Maybe you don't think
That that's the way it should be
Maybe it's not the way it is for you
Maybe it's not what you've seen
But I think it's something
To consider and appreciate
So then
If we do need to think about money
How much money do we need
To meet the project goals?
Again, what are you trying to do?
How many people do you need?
What roles do you need?
How much does it cost to pay those people?
Or how much does it cost
For your infrastructure?
Align how you get your money
With your project goals
This is some of the best advice
That I heard
If your project goals are something
And you create a way
To generate money
That is not aligned with the goals
You're actually running two businesses
You're running the business
That generates the money
And then you're running the business
That does the other thing
And unless you can find a way
To wed them together
The money one often wins
In terms of the time
Because you have commitments
That you've made
That you need to honor
And so when we got a grant
From my grant manager
At the Moore Foundation
Chris Menzel gave us that advice
And I think that that has been
Some of the best that I've heard
That's very easy to not recognize
At the beginning
Can you receive money?
Getting sponsors is great
That helps with some of this
But again, this is actually
Non-trivial sometimes
How do actually people pay you?
And then do people know
What they're paying for
And how you'll use it?
I hear this a lot in open source
I say it a lot myself
We're doing great work
Why don't they just give us money?
That's not really how things work
Unfortunately
But actually not unfortunately
People want to understand
What they're paying for
And how you'll use it
And so all of these other questions
About what's your governance structure?
How do you make decisions?
All of these things is really important
Actually for getting money
Because you can say
We need money for one and a half developers
And someone to write documentation
If we have this money
This person will do this
You'll see at the end of the year
That these features are implemented
We have a maintenance structure
And we have a set of docs
That you and your team needs it
Again, there has to be
This kind of public good
Is really important and true
But people need to understand
How you're using money
And have confidence
That you actually know
How you're going to be spending money
Okay, so Nadia Ekbal
As a part of this study
Interroads and Bridges
Also had this really nice
This lemonade stand
Handy guide to financial support for open source
So it's a GitHub repository
If you Google it
So she talks about a few different models
For open source structure
And I do sort of
I'm not saying something's missing
But that the piece of
Okay, this is how you bring the money in
But then how you spend it
And how you talk about how you spend it
Is a complimentary piece
So Posit
So one of the reasons
I am super excited to be at Posit
And why I came to Posit in the first place
Is because I think it's one of the
A great model for supporting open source software
So we have this concept of a virtuous cycle
Where open source tools
Generate demand
They're great tools for data scientists
They're free
But then you need to transition often
To like working in a corporate setting
Where you have privacy
Or you need to work with teams
And so then you need enterprise tools
To enable you to use those open source tools
And so those are the products
That we build and sell
And then we use that to invest back
In our pro products
And our open source products
And obviously this is hard
This is a big business
Like there's 300 people
JJ Leary's gonna talk next about Cordo
And built this business
Like this is non-trivial
But I think it hits a lot of these marks
Of like aligning your mission
With your ways of generating revenue
Thinking about how you bring income
Thinking about governance structure
There's 43 people working full time
On open source at Posit
Even more working on other pieces
Of open source within the company
But then even just within that
There are hundreds of open source products
And we actually don't necessarily
Govern them all the same way
Because they have different goals
So it's kind of a really interesting
Ecosystem around a lot of these
Different pieces of we consider
Maintenance
And I think one of the things
That's particularly great about it too
Is that because we have
So many open source developers
This idea of community of practice
So you in this room
Are not alone
There is a community
That is working together
In open source
And Posit like
We get to experience it like
Every day
Like that I get to see
My colleagues at this conference
Is amazing
Be on Slack with them
It makes such a difference
To have other people
Working on open source
At the same time
But there's a lot of other
Organizations out there
That help create these structures
The Kirk and Trudy's
Are pretty assigned
These PyData meetings
PyOpenSci
PyLadies
RLadies
NumFocus
And it's important
To not go it alone
Because when you're feeling like
Maybe this is
Like I'm not good at this
It's actually usually not true
It's just that it's hard
And so finding other people
That you can share with
Learn from
Is really important
In this space
So we in this room
Are building roads and bridges
Maybe transitioning to running crews
But we don't have to do it
By ourselves
We can talk to each other
We can develop resources
We can share them with each other
And so this was a little
Earlier stage of this talk
That I would have planned on
But I'm giving a workshop
On managing an open source project
At Posit.com
In Chicago in September
And I'll have all the materials
Online
But the ideas
Like some of the things
I talked about
Templates
Decision making
Opportunities to practice
With like conflict
Or how do you handle
Code of conduct
Like these are skills
That we can learn
Just like anything else
And so developing resources
To learn those things
As well as learning how to code
You can hear JJ's talk next
On Cordo
It's the best
It's like my favorite thing
I actually gave a talk
On it being one of my favorites
Yeah
At RStudioConf
I said these are a few
Of my favorite things
About Cordo presentations
And in that one
I sang poorly
And I will not do that here
And you can check out
PyOpenSci
Which is a great place
Around community practice
And Python packaging
Great community
Developing good resources
So I will stop here
I think there's a few minutes
For questions
I'm happy to talk about
Whatever you want to talk about
Open the door
On conversations
That we can continue
Later as well
So thank you so much
For this opportunity
Applause